QUESTION 1.1

What do the letters CDM stand for?

A. Control of Demolition and Management Regulations
B. Control of Dangerous Materials Regulations
C. Construction (Demolition Management) Regulations
D. Construction (Design and Management) Regulations

Right Answer: D

The CDM Regulations impose duties to manage construction projects, ensure physical safeguards are provided to prevent danger during such projects and that adequate welfare facilities are provided.

QUESTION 1.2

Identify one method of enforcing regulations that are available to the Health and Safety Executive:

A. Health Notice
B. Improvement Notice
C. Obstruction Notice
D. Increasing insurance premiums

Right Answer: B

Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law.

QUESTION 1.3

What happens if a Prohibition Notice is issued by an Inspector of the local authority or the HSE?

A. The work in hand can be completed, but no new work started
B. The work can continue if adequate safety precautions are put in place
C. The work that is subject to the notice must cease
D. The work can continue, provided a risk assessment is carried out

Right Answer: C

The work activity covered by a prohibition notice must cease, until the identified danger is removed.

QUESTION 1.4

Health and Safety Executive Inspector can?

A. Only visit if they have made an appointment
B. Visit at any time
C. Only visit if accompanied by the principal contractor
D. Only visit to interview the site manager

Right Answer: B

Inspectors have a range of powers, including the right to visit premises at any time.

QUESTION 1.5

Prohibition Notice means:

A. When you finish the work you must not start again
B. The work must stop immediately
C. Work is to stop for that day only
D. Work may continue until the end of the day

Right Answer: B

The work activity covered by the prohibition notice must cease, until the identified danger is removed.

QUESTION 1.6

In what circumstances can an HSE Improvement Notice be issued?

A. If there is a breach of legal requirements
B. By warrant through the police
C. Only between Monday and Friday on site
D. Through the prosecution office

Right Answer: A

Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law.

QUESTION 1.7

What is an Improvement Notice?

A. A notice issued by the site principal contractor to tidy up the site
B. A notice from the client to the principal contractor to speed up the work
C. A notice issued by a Building Control Officer to deepen foundations
D. A notice issued by an HSE/local authority Inspector to enforce compliance with health and safety legislation

Right Answer: D

Improvement notices require action to achieve standards which meet health and safety law.

QUESTION 1.8

If a Health and Safety Executive Inspector issues a Prohibition Notice, this means that:

A. The Site Manager can choose whether or not to ignore the notice
B. Specific work activities, highlighted on the notice, must stop
C. The HSE must supervise the work covered by the notice
D. The HSE must supervise all work from then on

Right Answer: B

Prohibition notices are intended to stop activities which can cause serious injury.

QUESTION 1.9

Employers are required to provide information to their employees on their health and safety rights and responsibilities and how to get advice by:

A. Telling them verbally when they start work for them
B. Displaying a poster or giving them leaflets approved by the HSE
C. Making them read the company health and safety policy
D. E-mailing the information to them

Right Answer: B

This is a requirement of the Health and Safety Information for Employees Regulations (as amended).

QUESTION 1.10

Who is responsible for signing a Company Safety Policy?

A. Site Manager
B. Company Safety Officer
C. Company Secretary
D. Managing Director

Right Answer: D

The Health and Safety at Work Act requires the most senior member of management to sign the health and safety policy statement.

QUESTION 1.11

Which one of the following must be in a company's written Health and Safety Policy?

A. Aims and objectives of the company
B. Organisation and arrangements in force for carrying out the health and safety policy
C. Name of the Health and Safety Adviser
D. Company Director's home address

Right Answer: B

This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety at Work Act.

QUESTION 1.12

Employers have to produce a written Health and Safety Policy statement when:

A. A contract commences
B. They employ five people or more
C. The safety representative requests it
D. The HSE notifies them

Right Answer: B

This is a specific requirement of the Health and Safety at Work Act.

QUESTION 1.13

Companies employing five or more people must have a written Health and Safety Policy because:

A. The principal contractor gives them work on site
B. The HSAWA 1974 requires it
C. The Social Security Act requires it
D. The trade unions require it

Right Answer: B

QUESTION 1.14

What do the letters HSE stand for?

A. Highly Safe Electrician
B. Health and Safety Exercise
C. Health and Safety Examiner
D. Health and Safety Executive

Right Answer: D

The Health and Safety Executive was established under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974.

QUESTION 1.15

The Health and Safety Executive is:

A. Part of the National Health Service
B. The regulatory body for the promotion of health and safety at work
C. The jury in health and safety court cases
D. Part of the police force

Right Answer: B

The Health and Safety Executive is part of the Department for Work and Pensions.

QUESTION 1.16

The Health and Safety at Work Act requires employers to provide what for their employees?

A. Adequate rest periods
B. Payment for work done
C. A safe place of work
D. Suitable transport to work

Right Answer: C

This is a specific requirement of Section 2 of the Health and Safety at Work Act.

QUESTION 1.17

The Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 and any regulations made under the Act are:

A. Not compulsory, but should be complied with if convenient
B. Advisory to companies and individuals
C. Practical advice for the employer to follow
D. Legally binding

Right Answer: D

The requirements of health and safety law are mandatory and failure to follow them can lead to prosecution.

QUESTION 1.18

Under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, which of the following have a duty to work safely?

A. Employees only
B. The general public
C. Employers only
D. All people at work

Right Answer: D

Employers, employees and the self-employed all have duties to work safely under the Act.

QUESTION 1.19

What is the MAXIMUM penalty that a Higher Court, can currently impose for a breach of the Health and Safety at Work Act?

A. £20,000 fine and two years' imprisonment
B. £15,000 fine and three years' imprisonment
C. £1,000 fine and six months imprisonment
D. Unlimited fine and two years' imprisonment

Right Answer: D

A Lower Court can impose a fine of up to £20,000 and/or up to six months imprisonment for certain offences. The potential fine in a Higher Court, however, is unlimited and the term of imprisonment can be up to 2 years.

QUESTION 1.20

What do the letters ACOP stand for?

A. Accepted Code of Provisions
B. Approved Condition of Practice
C. Approved Code of Practice
D. Accepted Code of Practice

Right Answer: C

An ACOP is a code of practice approved by the Health and Safety Executive (or the Health and Safety Commission prior to April 2008).

QUESTION 1.21

Where should you look for official advice on health and safety matters?

A. A set of health and safety guidelines provided by suppliers
B. The health and safety rules as laid down by the employer
C. Guidance issued by the Health and Safety Executive
D. A professionally approved guide book on regulations

Right Answer: C

The HSE is the UK enforcing body and its guidance can be regarded as 'official'.

QUESTION 1.22

Regulations that govern health and safety on construction sites:

A. Apply only to inexperienced workers
B. Do not apply during 'out of hours' working
C. Apply only to large companies
D. Are mandatory (that is, compulsory)

Right Answer: D

The requirements of health and safety law are mandatory, and failure to follow them can lead to prosecutions.

QUESTION 1.23

Which of the following statements is correct?

A. The duty for health and safety falls only on the employer
B. All employees must take reasonable care, not only to protect themselves but also their colleagues
C. Employees have no responsibility for Health and Safety on site
D. Only the client is responsible for safety on site

Right Answer: B

This is a legal requirement under Section 7 of the Health & Safety at Work Act.

QUESTION 1.24

Who of the following would you expect to be responsible for managing health and safety on site?

A. Foreman
B. Your employer
C. Main sub-contractor
D. HSE Inspector

Right Answer: B

The responsibility for management of health and safety at work rests with the employer.

QUESTION 1.25

Which of the following is correct for risk assessment?

A. It is a good idea but not essential
B. Only required to be done for hazardous work
C. Must always be done
D. Only required on major jobs

Right Answer: C

There is a legal requirement for all work to be suitably risk assessed.

QUESTION 1.26

In the context of a risk assessment, what do you understand by the term risk?

A. An unsafe act or condition
B. Something with the potential to cause injury
C. Any work activity that can be described as dangerous
D. The likelihood that harm from a particular hazard will occur

Right Answer: D

Hazard and risk are not the same. Risk reflects the chance of being harmed by a hazard.

QUESTION 1.27

Who would you expect to carry out a risk assessment on your working site?

A. The CDM Co-ordinator
B. A visiting HSE Inspector
C. The construction project designer
D. A competent person

Right Answer: D

A risk assessment must be conducted by a 'competent person'.

QUESTION 1.28

What is a HAZARD?

A. Where an accident is likely to happen
B. An accident waiting to happen
C. Something with the potential to cause harm
D. The likelihood of something going wrong

Right Answer: C

Examples of hazards include: a drum of acid, breeze blocks on an elevated plank; cables running across a floor.

QUESTION 1.29

What must be done before any work begins?

A. Emergency plan
B. Assessment of risk
C. Soil assessment
D. Geological survey

Right Answer: B

This is a legal requirement of the Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations.

QUESTION 1.30

Complete the following sentence: A risk assessment:

A. Is a piece of paper required by law
B. Prevents accidents
C. Is a means of analysing what might go wrong
D. Isn't particularly useful

Right Answer: C

Risk assessment involves a careful review of what can cause harm and the practical measures to be taken to reduce the risk of harm.

QUESTION 1.31

Why would your supervisor ask you to read the method statement and risk assessment before you start your next job?

A. They think you have got nothing better to do
B. The documents contain information on how to carry out the job in a safe manner
C. They wouldn't as they think they are a waste of time
D. As someone has taken the time and trouble to write them, you might as well read them

Right Answer: B

The supervisor must, by law, keep workers advised of significant risks, and control measures.

QUESTION 1.32

What do the blue and white health and safety signs tell you?

A. Things you must do
B. Where the nearest fire exit is
C. The hazards in the area
D. Things you must not do

Right Answer: A

Blue and white signs show a 'mandatory' requirement.

QUESTION 1.33

What colours are emergency exit signs?

A. Green and white
B. Red and yellow
C. Red and white
D. Blue and white

Right Answer: A

The colours are prescribed in the Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations.

QUESTION 1.34

What is the main colour on a safety sign stating that you must NOT do something?

A. Blue
B. Green
C. Red
D. Yellow

Right Answer: C

Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black pictogram on a white background with red edging and diagonal line.

QUESTION 1.35

The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a warning, for example 'Fork-lift trucks operating'?

A. Blue and white
B. Green and white
C. Yellow and black
D. Red and white

Right Answer: C

Warning signs are triangular and feature a black pictogram on a yellow background with black edging.

QUESTION 1.36

The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a prohibited activity, for example 'No access for pedestrians'?

A. Green and white
B. Red, black and white
C. Blue and white
D. Yellow and black

Right Answer: B

Prohibitory signs are round and feature a black pictogram on a white background with red edging and diagonal line.

QUESTION 1.37

The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a mandatory activity, for example 'Safety helmets must be worn'?

A. Green and white
B. Red, black and white
C. Blue and white
D. Yellow and black

Right Answer: C

Mandatory signs are round and feature a white pictogram on a blue background.

QUESTION 1.38

The Health and Safety (Safety Signs and Signals) Regulations require the colour coding of safety signs. What colours are used on a sign indicating a safe condition, for example First Aid kit?

A. Red, black and white
B. Blue and white
C. Yellow and black
D. Green and white

Right Answer: D

Emergency escape and first-aid signs are rectangular or square and feature a white pictogram on a green background.

QUESTION 1.39

Why should regular inspections of the workplace take place?

A. To check whether the working environment is safe
B. To check that all employees are present
C. To check that everyone is doing their job
D. To prepare for a visit from an HSE Inspector

Right Answer: A

The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations require that routine inspections of workplaces are carried out to ensure that preventative and protective measures are in place and effective.

QUESTION 1.40

How can you help to prevent accidents?

A. Don't report them
B. Know how to get help quickly
C. Report any unsafe conditions
D. Know where the first-aid kit is kept

Right Answer: C

Action to improve safety can only be taken if the risk is known about. Employees have a duty of care to other employees.
