QUESTION 2.1

If there is a risk of injury from lifting loads what should you think about first?

A. Whether the load needs to be lifted at all
B. What the weight of the load is
C. Where to hold the load when lifting
D. How to lift the load

Right Answer: A

If possible, it is best to avoid the risks from lifting altogether. This is the preferred requirement laid down in the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992.

QUESTION 2.2

Before performing manual lifting what is the first thing you should do?

A. Check the headroom
B. Weigh the article
C. Assess the whole task
D. Kick it to see if it is stable

Right Answer: C

If you assess the whole task first, you will have a clear idea of possible hazards and how to overcome them, before lifting.

QUESTION 2.3

Which is the part of your body MOST LIKELY to be injured during a manual handling activity which involves moving a heavy load?

A. Knees
B. Forearms
C. Chest
D. Back

Right Answer: D

HSE statistics show that most manual handling injuries are to the back.

QUESTION 2.4

What should you do if your supervisor asks you to move something that you find is too heavy to lift?

A. Give it a try using correct lifting methods
B. Ask your mates to assist in the lift
C. Inform your supervisor that it is too heavy
D. Get a forklift truck or lifting tackle

Right Answer: C

The HSE advises employees to inform the employer if they identify hazardous handling activities.

QUESTION 2.5

What would you NOT consider in making a judgement of the risks from a load?

A. Its size and condition
B. Its colour
C. Its weight
D. Its centre of gravity

Right Answer: B

A, C and D can all affect the difficulty of lifting an object.

QUESTION 2.6

When moving a load fitted with wheels which of the following is generally true?

A. Pushing and pulling are equally risky
B. Pulling is preferable to pushing
C. Pushing is preferable to pulling
D. It is safer to pick it up and carry it

Right Answer: C

The operator should try to push rather than pull when moving a load, provided they can see over it and control steering and stopping.

QUESTION 2.7

A manual handling operation is defined as which one of the following?

A. Automated effort
B. Human effort
C. Mechanised and human effort
D. Mechanised effort

Right Answer: B

Manual handling covers human effort only.

QUESTION 2.8

What is the MAXIMUM weight that an individual may lift?

A. The weight they can lift comfortably
B. Whatever the supervisor instructs
C. 35kg provided that it has no sharp edges
D. 15kg provided that it is a compact load

Right Answer: A

There are no strict weight limits - the priority is to avoid injury.

QUESTION 2.9

What is the most common type of injury resulting from lifting loads from the floor?

A. Vibration white finger
B. Grazes to the knees
C. Head injuries
D. Back injuries

Right Answer: D

As shown by HSE statistics.

QUESTION 2.10

Where a load has to be lifted manually, what is the employer required to do by law?

A. Calculate the cost of the exercise
B. Determine the number of people required
C. Assess the risk of the task
D. Assess the time the job will take

Right Answer: C

This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992.

QUESTION 2.11

Which of the following is advisable when lifting a load manually?

A. Keep legs straight, bend back, use power of legs
B. Bend the knees, keep the back straight, use power of back
C. Bend the knees, keep the back as straight as possible, use power of legs
D. Keep legs and back straight, use power of legs

Right Answer: C

Stooping can increase the stress on the lower back. However, stooping slightly may be preferable to adopting a squatting posture, which can place excessive loads on knees and hips.

QUESTION 2.12

In manual handling, which of the following general statements is true?

A. You should keep your back bent when lifting
B. Anyone can carry any load as long as they are strong enough
C. Large loads should be broken down into smaller loads where possible
D. Loads should be held at arm's length while carrying

Right Answer: C

This is a recommendation (INDG143).

QUESTION 2.13

What is the recommended limit for a compact load, that can be safely carried by a fit, male worker?

A. 50kg
B. 40kg
C. 20kg
D. 25kg

Right Answer: D

This figure is in HSE guidance, and relates to lifting and lowering at elbow height.

QUESTION 2.14

Where there has been a major change in a manual handling operation, what should the employer do?

A. Monitor the operation being undertaken
B. Review the number of people involved
C. Review the original risk assessment
D. Monitor the cost of change

Right Answer: C

This is a specific requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992.

QUESTION 2.15

What should be the first consideration when you are about to lift a load on your own?

A. Assess whether it is safe to lift it on your own
B. Ensure you wear appropriate PPE
C. Wear gloves and grip properly
D. Ensure you lift with a bent back

Right Answer: A

Employees should assess whether there is a risk of injury before lifting. If they are not sure they should seek advice from their supervisor.

QUESTION 2.16

Which of the following would NOT make a load easier to handle manually?

A. Painting it a bright colour
B. Securing the load so that it does not shift unexpectedly
C. Reducing its weight
D. Providing suitable handles or hand grips

Right Answer: A

QUESTION 2.17

If there is a risk of injury from moving loads what should you think about?

A. Advising your supervisor
B. Carrying it anyway
C. Dragging it all the way
D. Getting someone to assist you over the distance

Right Answer: A

This is a requirement of the Manual Handling Operations regulations 1992.

QUESTION 2.18

As an approximate guide the manual handling capacity of a two person team is:

A. The sum of their individual capacities
B. The capacity of the strongest individual
C. The capacity of the weakest individual
D. Two thirds the sum of their individual capacities

Right Answer: D

This is contained in HSE guidance on the Manual Handling Operations Regulations 1992.

QUESTION 2.19

What does 'Kinetic lifting' mean?

A. Using a crane or some other mechanical means
B. Using a forklift truck or pallet truck
C. Lifting in the most safe and effective way
D. Getting a friend to help you with the load

Right Answer: C

QUESTION 2.20

What should you do first before lifting or moving a load?

A. Put on gloves
B. Assess the weight
C. Keep a straight back
D. Bend your knees

Right Answer: B

You or your employer must assess the risk of injury before lifting.

QUESTION 2.21

Before picking up a load, you should:

A. Bend your knees
B. Choose a pair of gloves
C. Ask a work mate to help you
D. Assess the risks

Right Answer: D

You or your employer must assess the risk of injury before lifting.

QUESTION 2.22

When picking up an object, you should:

A. Bend your arms
B. Bend your back
C. Wear a back brace
D. Bend your knees

Right Answer: D

Generally, the legs should do most of the work when lifting a load.

QUESTION 2.23

When judging 'individual capability' for manual handling, you should assume:

A. All women are equally capable
B. Young men are weak
C. All people are different
D. All men are equally capable

Right Answer: C

Assessing ability for manual handling must be done on an individual basis.

QUESTION 2.24

When an article has to be moved for a long distance, you should:

A. Use a barrow or trolley
B. Get someone else to do it for you
C. Drag it all the way
D. Carry it all the way

Right Answer: A

The use of handling aids can reduce the risk of injury.

QUESTION 2.25

Which is the correct way to lift a load?

A. Squat near load, bend back and use leg muscles
B. Squat near to the load, keeping the back as straight as possible and using leg muscles
C. Keep feet apart and bend back
D. Keep feet together and bend back

Right Answer: B

Handling techniques which allow the use of relatively strong leg muscles rather than those of the back are preferable.

QUESTION 2.26

Which would you consider to be generally correct when lifting a load?

A. Larger loads should be split into smaller loads if possible
B. Keep the load away from the body
C. When lifting you should bend your back
D. The feet should be together and the load lifted at arm's length

Right Answer: A

This is a recommendation in HSE guidance (INDG143).

QUESTION 2.27

If a load has an uneven centre of gravity, how should you lift it?

A. Keep the heaviest side of the load away from you
B. Keep the heaviest side of the load on the strongest arm
C. Keep the heaviest side of the load towards you
D. Keep the heaviest side of the load on the weakest arm

Right Answer: C

There is less risk of injury if a weight's centre of gravity is near the torso.
