QUESTION 6.1

An emergency route(s) must be provided on construction sites to ensure:

A. Safe passage to the open air
B. Safe passage to the rest area
C. Safe passage to a secure place of safety
D. Safe passage to the ground from height

Right Answer: C

QUESTION 6.2

What action should you take if you discover a fire?

A. Leave it because you will get the blame
B. Raise the alarm
C. Carry on working if it is safe to do so
D. Extinguish the fire without raising the alarm

Right Answer: B

Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others, particularly if the fire spreads.

QUESTION 6.3

If there had been a small fire, who should you report it to?

A. Your supervisor
B. The main contractor's site agent
C. The site's fire marshal
D. The resident site engineer

Right Answer: A

The supervisor should be aware, so that further preventative measures can be considered.

QUESTION 6.4

If you discover a fire at work, what should you do first:

A. Telephone 999
B. Use a fire extinguisher to put it out
C. Run around looking for an alarm to sound
D. Raise the alarm and warn fellow workers

Right Answer: D

Raising the alarm will reduce the risk to others, particularly if the fire spreads.

QUESTION 6.5

What is a fire assembly point?

A. The place to go when the fire alarm sounds
B. A place where the fire brigade goes to
C. A place where fire extinguishers are kept
D. The place where the fire alarm is

Right Answer: A

It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire.

QUESTION 6.6

Where would you go in the event of a fire?

A. To the canteen for a cup of tea
B. To the fire assembly point
C. To the site hut
D. To the fire to see what is going on

Right Answer: B

It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire.

QUESTION 6.7

What should you do if you hear the fire alarm?

A. Ignore it because it might be someone playing around
B. Leave work for the day
C. Evacuate the premises to a designated place of safety
D. Go towards the sound to find out what is going on

Right Answer: C

It is essential that people go to a place of safety, where supervisors or fire marshals know where they are, in the event of a fire.

QUESTION 6.8

All new fire extinguishers are coloured red or of bright self-coloured metal. How do you know the difference between types?

A. A different colour panel or band is on the body of the extinguishers
B. During site induction, you will be told where the different types of extinguishers are
C. The weight and shape of the extinguisher
D. The type of extinguisher is written on a sign next to it

Right Answer: A

Different coloured bands show extinguisher types e.g. black for CO2 and blue for dry powder.

QUESTION 6.9

A black-labelled fire extinguisher contains:

A. Dry powder
B. Water
C. Foam
D. Carbon dioxide

Right Answer: D

QUESTION 6.10

What is a blue-labelled fire extinguisher filled with?

A. Water
B. Foam
C. Dry powder
D. Carbon dioxide

Right Answer: C

QUESTION 6.11

Which fire extinguisher should not be used on flammable liquid fires?

A. Carbon dioxide
B. Powder
C. Water
D. Foam

Right Answer: C

Flammable liquids spread if attacked by water extinguishers.

QUESTION 6.12

What colour is a water filled fire extinguisher, or its label?

A. Black
B. Cream
C. Red
D. Green

Right Answer: C

QUESTION 6.13

When discharging carbon dioxide fire extinguishers, the nozzle:

A. Becomes warm
B. Becomes very hot
C. Becomes very cold
D. Doesn't change temperature

Right Answer: C

The expansion of CO2 gas coming out of the nozzle causes rapid cooling.

QUESTION 6.14

For fires involving spilled petrol, which types of fire extinguisher could you use?

A. Water, carbon dioxide or foam
B. Water, foam or dry powder
C. Foam, carbon dioxide or dry powder
D. Water, carbon dioxide or dry powder

Right Answer: C

Flammable liquids, such as petrol, spread if attacked by water extinguishers.

QUESTION 6.15

Which types of fire extinguishers should be used on electrical fires?

A. Foam and water
B. Carbon dioxide and dry powder
C. Dry powder and foam
D. Water and carbon dioxide

Right Answer: B

Liquids should not be used, since they may conduct electricity.

QUESTION 6.16

A red-labelled fire extinguisher should NOT be used:

A. On wood fires
B. Where there is a risk of electrocution
C. On burning clothes
D. On burning furniture

Right Answer: B

Red denotes water. Liquids should not be used on electrical fires, since they can conduct electricity.

QUESTION 6.17

A workmate burns their hand on a piece of very hot metal. What should you do first?

A. Rub some cream or Vaseline into the burn
B. Cover the burn with something dry
C. Warn other people about the piece of hot metal
D. Put their hand in cold water if it is available

Right Answer: D

Burns need immediate and sustained cooling.

QUESTION 6.18

Which of the following items should not be in a first aid box?

A. Safety pins
B. Pain killers
C. Disposable gloves
D. Triangular bandages

Right Answer: B

Drugs must not be kept in a first aid box (Health and Safety guidance note INDG 214).

QUESTION 6.19

How often should a first-aider qualified in First Aid at Work (FAW) or Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) receive retraining?

A. Every six months
B. Every two years
C. Every three years
D. Every four years

Right Answer: C

First Aid at Work (FAW) and Emergency First Aid at Work (EFAW) certificates are valid for three years and first-aiders are required to undertake retraining at the end of this period. However, the HSE also strongly recommends that first-aiders undertake annual (half-day) refresher training.

QUESTION 6.20

If you came across an injury on site, what is the first thing you should do?

A. Tell the casualty to visit their doctor
B. Inform the HSE
C. Contact a first-aider
D. Try and find out what happened

Right Answer: C

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.21

An employee has a fall and is obviously unconscious. What is the FIRST thing you should do?

A. Send someone for the first-aider
B. Find out if there were any witnesses
C. Try to protect them from any further injury
D. Put them in the recovery position

Right Answer: A

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.22

A labourer gets an electric shock; looks a bit pale but says they are alright. What should you do?

A. Send someone for the first-aider
B. Tell them to report it to their supervisor
C. Go and check the electrics so it cannot happen again
D. See if they want a drink or a cigarette

Right Answer: A

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.23

Which of the following must an employer consider when making provisions for first aid?

A. How much working space will be wasted
B. How much will it cost
C. Whether the local ambulance service can be used
D. The likely types of injury

Right Answer: D

Employers must match first-aid provision to the nature of risks at work.

QUESTION 6.24

In an on-site emergency, which of the following must a first-aider NOT do?

A. Treat an unconscious patient
B. Control bleeding
C. Give resuscitation
D. Give medicines to patients without authorisation

Right Answer: D

First-aid is concerned with preserving life and limb, and first-aiders are not trained to dispense medical treatments.

QUESTION 6.25

If someone has fallen over and has stopped breathing, what is the first thing you should do?

A. Send for help
B. Attend to any broken bones
C. Try to give the casualty a drink
D. Try to start the casualty breathing

Right Answer: A

Do not delay in sending for help; then try to start the casualty breathing.

QUESTION 6.26

If someone has fallen off a ladder and they say their leg is broken, what should you do?

A. Send for the first-aider
B. Help them to the cabin or mess hut
C. Move the ladder so no-one trips over it
D. Bandage their legs together

Right Answer: A

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.27

Your workmate suddenly gets a foreign body in the eye. What should you do?

A. Take your workmate to the supervisor
B. Use a clean handkerchief to try and remove it
C. Wash your hands before touching your mate's face
D. Send someone for the first-aider

Right Answer: D

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.28

A person nearly collapses complaining of stomach pains. What should you do?

A. Send someone for the first-aider
B. Go and find them something to drink
C. Help them to find somewhere comfortable to sit
D. Ask them if they want something to eat

Right Answer: A

Competent first-aid treatment is essential, and should be summoned immediately.

QUESTION 6.29

A workmate lifting a big box suddenly shouts 'oh, my back' and drops the box. What should you do?

A. Tell them to leave it for someone else to lift
B. Send for the first-aider
C. Help them to lift the box
D. Find them somewhere comfortable to sit and rest

Right Answer: B

The priority for any back injury is to obtain first-aid advice, in order to prevent further damage.

QUESTION 6.30

What should you do immediately if you get a small cut on a finger whilst at work?

A. Carry on working
B. Get first-aid
C. Ask your employer to report it to the HSE
D. Just wash it clean

Right Answer: B

It is important to obtain first-aid to prevent further harm (e.g. through infection). It should also be recorded in the accident book (Bl 510).

QUESTION 6.31

In an emergency situation at work you should do what?

A. Phone the HSE Inspectorate
B. Obey the site emergency procedure
C. Ensure your work mates are all accounted for
D. Leave the site immediately

Right Answer: B

A site emergency plan should have been drawn up and you should be familiar with the emergency procedure.

QUESTION 6.32

What does the sound of a siren on-site normally indicate?

A. A fire
B. A toxic escape
C. An explosion
D. An emergency

Right Answer: D

QUESTION 6.33

The purpose of fire-stopping in a building is to:

A. Prevent a fire starting
B. Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings in walls and floors
C. Activate fire sprinklers
D. Set off the fire alarm

Right Answer: B

Fire-stopping is a passive fire protection measure used to seal any openings created in a fire resistance-rated wall or floor assembly, e.g. to allow pipes or wiring systems to pass through. During fire conditions this will impede the spread of fire and smoke.

QUESTION 6.34

What are fire-stops designed to do?

A. Extinguish a fire
B. Protect services (such as wiring systems) against fire damage
C. Close fire doors automatically
D. Delay the passage of fire and smoke through openings in walls and floors

Right Answer: D

Fire-stops are designed to maintain the fireproofing of a wall or floor assembly. Fire-stopping delays the spread of fire and, generally, the spread of smoke as well.

QUESTION 6.35

In addition to preserving fire separation between areas of a building, which other important fire safety function can fire-stopping achieve?

A. Preventing premature structural collapse
B. Reducing nuisance fire alarms
C. Reducing noise transmission
D. Saving energy

Right Answer: A

During a fire it is essential that the load-bearing capacity of elements of the building structure are maintained until occupants have escaped. Timber studs, joists or 'I' beams, for example, may only have a short survival time if exposed to fire and may rely on linings, such as a plasterboard ceiling, for fire-resistance. Services passing through such linings should therefore be fire-stopped.

QUESTION 6.36

Intumescent materials used to provide fire-stopping are designed to:

A. Expand when subjected to smoke
B. Shrink when subjected to heat
C. Expand when subjected to heat
D. Prevent noise transmission

Right Answer: C

A limited number of fire-resistant materials may be used to provide fire-stopping. These include intumescent products, which are designed to expand and provide fire-stopping when subjected to heat. Examples include intumescent 'pillows'.

QUESTION 6.37

What should you do if you disturb fire-stopping around a wiring system penetrating a wall or floor whilst carrying out work?

A. Nail a piece of wood over any gaps
B. Ensure that the fire-stopping is reinstated to the necessary standard as soon as possible
C. Highlight this on any certification
D. Fill any holes or gaps with squashed newspaper

Right Answer: B

It is essential that the integrity of fire compartments is maintained during the construction of buildings and on their completion. Compromising compartmentation, such as failing to adequately fire-stop (seal) openings for services to pass through, can undermine fire precautions catastrophically. Only a limited range of products are suitable and they must be correctly applied to provide the required degree of fire-stopping.

QUESTION 6.38

If you discover a hole or gap in a fire rated wall or floor that has not been fire-stopped, what should you do?

A. Report it to your supervisor without delay
B. Ignore it unless it is causing a draught
C. Cover the hole or gap with insulating tape
D. Use decorators' sealant to fill the gap

Right Answer: A

Supervisors need to be made aware of any observed inadequacies in fire-stopping - which can undermine fire precautions catastrophically during the construction of buildings and on their completion. Only a limited range of products are suitable and they must be correctly applied to provide the required degree of fire-stopping.

QUESTION 6.39

Which one of the following is associated with a Higher Risk Building (HRBs) in England?

A. At least 18 metres in height or seven storeys
B. At least 15 metres in height or seven storeys
C. At least 15 metres in height or six storeys
D. At least 18 metres in height or six storeys

Right Answer: A

At least 18 meters in height or seven storeys is the height at which the Building Safety Regulator regime will apply in England.

QUESTION 6.40

For a holistic approach to fire safety - to plan for all aspects of fire safety - the three main areas that need to be considered are design, construction and...

A. Occupation
B. Fire stopping
C. Maintenance
D. Demolition

Right Answer: C

Design, construction and maintenance are the main aspects to be considered as part of a holistic view to fire safety covering all elements to cover all aspects.

QUESTION 6.41

Which of the following materials provide the least effective fire resistance?

A. Brick
B. Concrete
C. Timber
D. Steel

Right Answer: C

Timber or wood has a low ignition point and can be highly flammable, generally considered to have poor fire resistance.

QUESTION 6.42

When man-made substances, such as rubber, burn, the colour of the smoke is typically:

A. White
B. Black
C. Grey
D. Yellow

Right Answer: B

The black colour of smoke from burning man-made substances, including rubber, is primarily due to incomplete combustion of carbon-based materials, and soot particles suspended in the air making the smoke appear black.

QUESTION 6.43

Which one of the following is a benefit of a 'stay put' strategy for fire evacuation in high risk buildings?

A. It slows the fire fighters' response to a fire
B. It reduces communication between occupants and emergency services
C. You reduce the risk of entering a smoky corridor and being overcome by smoke
D. It allows lifts to be used more effectively

Right Answer: C

A 'stay-put' strategy is designed to prevent injury, reduce panic, and reduce smoke inhalation which could cause injury or fatalities.

QUESTION 6.44

Which one of the following is not a requirement of a protected escape route?

A. Leads to a safe place
B. Protection from smoke
C. Infra-red lights
D. Protection from fire

Right Answer: C

Although emergency lighting systems are mandated to provide adequate illumination in escape routes, this does not include infra-red lights specifically.

QUESTION 6.45

Which one of the following is not an area of competence?

A. Skills
B. Resilience
C. Knowledge
D. Behaviours

Right Answer: B

Competence is broadly defined as the skills, knowledge, experience, and behaviours of an individual.

QUESTION 6.46

What is a key consideration for individuals to ensure safety at work?

A. Pushing personal limits to complete a job at any cost
B. Having a go at jobs without proper training
C. Recognising the limitations of competence and not exceeding your own limitations
D. Ignoring boundaries to complete a job in the quickest manner possible

Right Answer: C

Competence includes the recognition and awareness of the limitations of your own competence, and not undertaking jobs or tasks for which you haven't received proper training as this will lead to unsafe and potentially dangerous practices.

QUESTION 6.47

Which one of the following is a consequence of poor workmanship?

A. Improved fire safety
B. A good reputation
C. Increase in hazard and servicing
D. Increased structural stability

Right Answer: C

A lack of competence and poor workmanship can lead to increased servicing and maintenance requirements, and increased hazards as a result.

QUESTION 6.48

What is CROSS-UK?

A. A branch of the British Red Cross for Construction Workers
B. An online forum for workers to complain about their employers
C. A confidential reporting system to report on fire and structural safety issues
D. A charity that supplies work equipment to apprentices

Right Answer: C

CROSS-UK is Collaborative Reporting for Safer Structures UK - a confidential reporting system which allows professionals working in the built environment to report on fire or structural safety issues.